Handlers (#790)
dotnet/docs-maui: docs/user-interface/handlers/index.md

---
title: ".NET MAUI handlers"
description: "Learn about .NET MAUI handlers, which map cross-platform controls to performant native controls on each platform."
ms.date: 08/15/2022
---

# Handlers

> .NET Multi-platform App UI (.NET MAUI) provides a collection of cross-platform controls that can be used to display data, initiate actions, indicate activity, display collections, pick data, and more. Each control has an interface representation, that abstracts the control. Cross-platform controls that implement these interfaces are known as *virtual views*. *Handlers* map these virtual views to native views on each platform, and are responsible for creating the underlying native view, and mapping the cross-platform control API to the native view API. For example, on iOS a .NET MAUI handler maps a .NET MAUI `Button` to an iOS `UIButton`. On Android, the `Button` is mapped to an `AppCompatButton`:

Reviewer: Maybe simplify this a little bit?

1. Cross-platform was already established with control, so the 2nd time it's said can probably be omitted.
2. As someone who isn't used to calling things "views" seeing control mentioned and "view" mentioned is confusing. I added a little clause to help bridge that knowledge gap.
3. I .NET MAUI gets in the way of the example a little bit. Handler hasn't been mentioned as "native" or platform-specific, so I think you can safely remove it as you don't need to specify it's a .NET MAUI handler.

```suggestion
.NET Multi-platform App UI (.NET MAUI) provides a collection of cross-platform controls that can be used to display data, initiate actions, indicate activity, display collections, pick data, and more. Each control has an interface representation, that abstracts the control, known as a *virtual view*. *Handlers* map these virtual views to platform-specific controls, known as *native views*. They're also responsible for instantiating the underlying native view, and mapping the cross-platform control API to the native view API. For example, on iOS a handler maps a .NET MAUI `Button` to an iOS `UIButton`. On Android, the `Button` is mapped to an `AppCompatButton`:
```

> :::image type="content" source="media/overview/button-handler.png" alt-text="Button handler architecture." border="false":::

Reviewer: This image is really nice, but maybe some swim lanes that specify what the native view, virtual view, handler, and control is. (really just to clarify native/virtual view)

Handlers are accessed through their control-specific interface, such as `IButton` for a `Button`. This avoids the cross-platform control having to reference its handler, and the handler having to reference the cross-platform control.

> Each handler class exposes the native view that implements the cross-platform control via its `PlatformView` property. This property can be accessed to set native view properties, invoke native view methods, and subscribe to native view events. In addition, the cross-platform control implemented by the handler is exposed via its `VirtualView` property.

Reviewer: This doesn't make sense to me. Did these get mixed up a bit?

```suggestion
Each handler class exposes the native view that implements the platform-specific control via its `PlatformView` property. This property can be accessed to set native view properties, invoke native view methods, and subscribe to native view events. In addition, the cross-platform control implemented by the handler is exposed via its `VirtualView` property.
```

> When creating a custom cross-platform control, whose implementation is provided on each platform by native views, a handler should be implemented that maps the cross-platform control API to the native view APIs. For more information, see [Create custom controls with handlers](create.md).

Reviewer: nit: I don't know that **custom** adds anything here.

> Handlers can also be customized to augment the appearance and behavior of existing cross-platform controls beyond the customization that's possible through the control's API. Handlers are global, and customizing a handler for a control will result in all controls of the same type being customized in your app. For more information, see [Customize .NET MAUI controls with handlers](customize.md).

Reviewer: If handlers are platform-specific, why would it "augment the appearance and behavior of existing **cross-platform** controls...?" Wouldn't it be the platform-specific native views?

Author: Nope :)

## Mappers

A key concept of .NET MAUI handlers is mappers. Each handler typically provides a *property mapper*, and sometimes a *command mapper*, that maps the cross-platform control's API to the native view's API.

> A *property mapper* defines what actions to take when a property change occurs in the cross-platform control. It's a `Dictionary` that maps the cross-platform control's interface properties to their associated Actions. Each platform handler implementation then provides implementations of the Actions, which manipulate the native view API. This ensures that when a property is set on a cross-platform control, the underlying native view is updated as required.

Reviewer: - nit: action is sometimes Action, not sure why it's capitalized? 
- nit: Do you need to say "cross-platform control's **interface** properties"? I think it adds too much complexity, what about "cross-platform control's properties".
- nit: I think implementation is used too much in "Each platform handler **implementation** then provides **implementations** of the Actions" maybe just "Each platform handler then provides implementations of the Actions"

Author: 2nd nit: it's specifically the cross-platform control's interface properties, rather than the control's properties.

> A *command mapper* defines what actions to take when the cross-platform control sends commands to native views. They're similar to property mappers, but allow for additional data to be passed. Commands, in this context, doesn't mean `ICommand` implementations. Instead, a command is just an instruction, and optionally its data, that's sent to a native view. The command mapper is a `Dictionary` that maps the cross-platform control's command to their associated Actions. Each handler implementation then provides implementations of the Actions, which manipulate the native view API. This ensures that when a cross-platform control sends a command to its native view, the native view is updated as required. For example, in .NET MAUI the `ScrollViewHandler`, which provides the platform implementations for the `ScrollView`, uses a command mapper for the `ScrollView` to request its handler to instruct the underlying native views to scroll to a specific location, and passes the required scroll arguments. The `ScrollViewHandler` on each platform parses the scroll arguments and invokes native view functionality to perform the required scroll.

Reviewer: Like the previous comment, this could be use less "implementation" words 😁 

```diff
- Each handler implementation then provides implementations of the Actions, which manipulate the native view API.
+ Each platform handler then provides implementations of the Actions, which manipulate the native view API.
```

The example at the end of this paragraph is really long and it kind of detracts from the conceptual knowledge you're gaining by reading it. My brain has to process and map what the example is saying to what the previous words in the paragraph conveyed, and I think it's easy to get lost in what is being described. Maybe less clauses and simplify the example a bit?

Original:

>For example, in .NET MAUI the `ScrollViewHandler`, which provides the platform implementations for the `ScrollView`, uses a command mapper for the `ScrollView` to request its handler to instruct the underlying native views to scroll to a specific location, and passes the required scroll arguments. The `ScrollViewHandler` on each platform parses the scroll arguments and invokes native view functionality to perform the required scroll.

My suggestion

>For example, when the `ScrollView` control is scrolled, the `ScrollViewHandler` uses a command mapper to invoke an action that accepts a scroll position argument. The action then instructs the underlying native view to scroll to to that location.

> The advantage of using *mappers* to update native views, is that native views can be decoupled from cross-platform controls. This removes the need for native views to subscribe to cross-platform control events. It also allows for easy customization because mappers can be modified without subclassing.

Reviewer: Erroneous comma?
```suggestion
The advantage of using *mappers* to update native views is that native views can be decoupled from cross-platform controls. This removes the need for native views to subscribe to cross-platform control events. It also allows for easy customization because mappers can be modified without subclassing.
```

## Handler lifecycle

> All handler-based .NET MAUI controls support two handler lifecycle events:

Reviewer: Question to answer for me: Are there controls that aren't handler based? I would have assumed they were all handler based.

Author: Yes. There are four controls that aren't handler based. That's a whole other story.

> - `HandlerChanging` is raised when a new handler is about to be created for a cross-platform control, and when an existing handler is about to be removed from a cross-platform control. The `HandlerChangingEventArgs` object that accompanies this event has `NewHandler` and `OldHandler` properties, of type `IElementHandler`. When the `NewHandler` property isn't `null`, the event indicates that a new handler is about to be created for a cross-platform control. When the `OldHandler` property isn't `null`, the event indicates that the existing native control is about be removed from the cross-platform control, and therefore that any native events should be unwired and other cleanup performed.

Reviewer: erroneous `that`
```suggestion
- `HandlerChanging` is raised when a new handler is about to be created for a cross-platform control, and when an existing handler is about to be removed from a cross-platform control. The `HandlerChangingEventArgs` object that accompanies this event has `NewHandler` and `OldHandler` properties, of type `IElementHandler`. When the `NewHandler` property isn't `null`, the event indicates that a new handler is about to be created for a cross-platform control. When the `OldHandler` property isn't `null`, the event indicates that the existing native control is about be removed from the cross-platform control, and therefore any native events should be unwired and other cleanup performed.
```

- `HandlerChanged` is raised after the handler for a cross-platform control has been created. This event indicates that the native control that implements the cross-platform control is available, and all the property values set on the cross-platform control have been applied to the native control.

> [!NOTE]
> The `HandlerChanging` event is raised on a cross-platform control before the `HandlerChanged` event.

> In addition to these events, each cross-platform control also has an overridable `OnHandlerChanged` method that's invoked when the `HandlerChanged` event is raised, and a `OnHandlerChanging` method that's invoked when the `HandlerChanging` event is raised.

Reviewer: I would swap these since changing comes before changed.

## Handler-based views

The following table lists the types that implement handler-based views in .NET MAUI:

| View | Interface | Handler | Property Mapper | Command Mapper |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| `ActivityIndicator` | `IActivityIndicator` | `ActivityIndicatorHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `BlazorWebView` | `IBlazorWebView` | `BlazorWebViewHandler` | `BlazorWebViewMapper` | |
| `Border` | `IBorderView` | `BorderHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `Button` | `IButton` | `ButtonHandler` | `ImageButtonMapper`. `TextButtonMapper`, `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |

> | `CarouselView` | | `CarouselViewHandler` | `Mapper` |

Reviewer: Missing a closing pipe
```suggestion
| `CarouselView` | | `CarouselViewHandler` | `Mapper` | |
```

| `CheckBox` | `ICheckBox` | `CheckBoxHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |

> | `CollectionView` |  | `CollectionViewHandler` | `Mapper` |

Reviewer: Missing a closing pipe
```suggestion
| `CollectionView` |  | `CollectionViewHandler` | `Mapper` | |
```

| `ContentView` | `IContentView` | `ContentViewHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `DatePicker` | `IDatePicker` | `DatePickerHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `Editor` | `IEditor` | `EditorHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `Ellipse` | | `ShapeViewHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `Entry` | `IEntry` | `EntryHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `GraphicsView` | `IGraphicsView` | `GraphicsViewHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |
| `Image` | `IImage` | `ImageHandler` | `Mapper` | `CommandMapper` |

> | `ImageButton` | `IImageButton` | `ImageButtonHandler` | `ImageMapper`, `Mapper` |

Reviewer: Missing a closing pipe
```suggestion
| `ImageButton` | `IImageButton` | `ImageButtonHandler` | `ImageMapper`, `Mapper` | |
```
